>> Stewart: THE UNITED STATES
IS IN THE MIDST OF A MATERNAL
HEALTH CRISIS.
IN FACT, WOMEN IN THE UNITED
STATES ARE MORE LIKELY TO DIE
FROM PREGNANCY-RELATED
COMPLICATIONS THAN IN ANY OTHER
DEVELOPED COUNTRY.
FOR BLACK WOMEN, THE REALITY
IS EVEN MORE STARTLING.
THEIR DEATH RATE IS THREE TIMES
HIGHER THAN THAT OF WHITE
WOMEN.
AND BLACK BABIES ARE TWICE AS
LIKELY TO DIE BEFORE THEIR FIRST
BIRTHDAY.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE BRING YOU A REPORT FROM
TENNESSEE ABOUT ONE CLINIC THAT
IS TRYING TO REVERSE THAT TREND,
ONE WOMAN AT A TIME.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO REPORTS IN OUR ONGOING
SERIES ABOUT POVERTY AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA, "CHASING
THE DREAM."
>> I MEAN, I'M EXCITED, BUT
NERVOUS, YEAH.
>> Reporter: EXPECTANT MOTHER
BRITTANY BRIGGS IS NERVOUS.
>> I'M JUST WORRIED ABOUT THE
PAIN.
YOU KNOW, I'M JUST NOT 100% SURE
ABOUT MY PAIN TOLERANCE.
>> Reporter: A YEAR AGO SHE
WOULDN'T HAVE HAD THE
OPPORTUNITY TO EXPRESS HER
CONCERNS IN A SETTING LIKE THIS,
IT'S GROUP PRENATAL CARE LED
EVERY MONTH BY MIDWIVES NIKIA
GRAYSON AND JODILYN OWEN.
THE WOMEN ARE MEETING AT
CHOICES, A PRIVATELY-FUNDED
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CLINIC IN
AN UNDERSERVED AREA OF MEMPHIS.
LAST YEAR, CHOICES BEGAN
OFFERING MIDWIFERY CARE.
MIDWIVES HERE HAVE ALREADY
DELIVERED 11 BABIES WITH 19 MORE
ON THE WAY.
>> WE WANT YOU TO LEAVE OUR CARE
STRONGER.
WE WANT YOU TO LEAVE OUR CARE
KNOWING HOW YOU SHOULD BE
TREATED, THAT YOU ARE VALUED.
>> Reporter: NIKIA GRAYSON IS
CERTIFIED AS BOTH A MIDWIFE AND
A NURSE PRACTITIONER.
SHE ALSO HAS MASTERS IN PUBLIC
HEALTH AND ANTHROPOLOGY.
GRAYSON FIRST STUDIED INFANT
MORTALITY IN THE BLACK COMMUNITY
AS A GRADUATE STUDENT.
>> IN THESE FAMILIES, THE LOSS
OF A BABY WAS ALMOST NORMALIZED.
OF COURSE THEY GRIEVED AND IT
WAS VERY HEARTBREAKING FOR THEM,
BUT IT WAS GENERATIONAL, WHAT I
FOUND WAS LACKING WAS ACCESS TO
CARE.
AND THEN THE TYPE OF CARE THEY
RECEIVED, AND HOW THEY DIDN'T
FEEL VALUED OR HEARD.
>> Reporter: BEFORE THE 1900'S,
MANY BIRTH ATTENDANTS ACROSS THE
SOUTH WERE BLACK MIDWIVES.
NOW LESS THAN 4% OF U.S.
MIDWIVES ARE BLACK.
>> IT WAS TAKEN AWAY FROM US, IN
OUR COMMUNITY, THESE ARE OUR
TRADITIONS, AND WE'RE TAKING
THEM BACK.
>> Reporter: GRAYSON IS ONE OF
ONLY EIGHT NURSE-MIDWIVES IN
MEMPHIS AND ONE OF JUST TWO
BLACK MIDWIVES IN THIS
PREDOMINANTLY AFRICAN AMERICAN
CITY.
IN MEMPHIS, WITHIN THE FIRST
YEAR, AFRICAN AMERICAN BABIES
DIE AT A RATE THREE TIMES HIGHER
THAN THAT OF WHITE BABIES.
>> I THINK THAT WHAT WE ARE NOW
SEEING IS A DEMAND FOR QUALITY
CARE, QUALITY CARE THAT IS
SENSITIVE TO PEOPLE'S CULTURAL
NEEDS, AND THE IDEA THAT THE
SYSTEM NEEDS TO CHANGE IN ORDER
TO PREVENT THESE MATERNAL AND
INFANT MORTALITY OUTCOMES THAT
WE'RE SEEING.
>> Reporter: AFRICAN AMERICAN
WOMEN ARE MORE LIKELY TO
EXPERIENCE POVERTY AND LACK
INSURANCE, WHICH PUTS THEM AT
GREATER RISK FOR POOR MATERNAL
AND INFANT HEALTH OUTCOMES.
BUT RACIAL DISPARITIES PERSIST
EVEN FOR BLACK WOMEN WHO ARE
COLLEGE EDUCATED, ACCORDING TO A
STUDY IN THE "NEW ENGLAND
JOURNAL OF MEDICINE" AND AN
ANALYSIS BY THE NEW YORK CITY
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.
>> THERE'S SOMETHING WRONG WITH
THE SYSTEM WHEN AFRICAN AMERICAN
WOMEN WHO ARE COLLEGE-EDUCATED
AND HAVE GREAT JOBS CAN STILL
HAVE POORER OUTCOMES THAN WHITE
WOMEN WHO ARE UNEDUCATED.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, THE
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
OBSTETRICIANS AND GYNECOLOGISTS
ACKNOWLEDGED THAT: "THE RACIAL
AND ETHNIC DISPARITIES IN
WOMEN'S HEALTH, INCLUDING HIGHER
RATES OF PRE-TERM BIRTH AND
MATERNAL MORTALITY CANNOT BE
REVERSED WITHOUT ADDRESSING
RACIAL BIAS, BOTH IMPLICIT AND
EXPLICIT."
>> THE RACIAL BIAS WHEN IT COMES
TO BLACK WOMEN HAVING BABIES IS
HIDDEN.
>> Reporter: DR. KIA PINCKNEY IS
AN OBSTETRICIAN AT REGIONAL ONE
HOSPITAL IN MEMPHIS.
SHE SAYS CATEGORIZING AND
DIAGNOSING PATIENTS ACCORDING TO
THEIR RACE IS PART OF AMERICAN
MEDICAL PRACTICE.
>> THAT BIAS MEANS IT'S KIND OF
LIKE WE HAVE SHADES WHEN WE'RE
LOOKING AT THIS PATIENT.
SO SHE'S AFRICAN AMERICAN, MOST
LIKELY IT'S PREECLAMPSIA, SO
THAT PREVENTS US FROM THINKING
OF OTHER DIFFERENTIALS OF WHAT
IT COULD BE.
COULD IT BE A MIGRAINE, OR COULD
IT BE JUST A HEADACHE BECAUSE
SHE DIDN'T SLEEP LAST NIGHT
BECAUSE SHE WAS UP WITH ALL HER
CHILDREN.
>> THE TRUTH IS THAT BLACK WOMEN
ARE LESS BELIEVED WHEN THEY HAVE
SYMPTOMS THAT ARE CONCERNING,
FROM PAIN TO SHORTNESS OF BREATH
TO OTHER THINGS THAT ARE REALLY
CONCERNING.
>> Reporter: DR. NEEL SHAH IS AN
OBSTETRICIAN AND PROFESSOR OF
OBSTETRICS AT HARVARD
UNIVERSITY.
THERE IS RESEARCH BACKING HIM
UP: SEVERAL STUDIES, INCLUDING
FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA AND IN THE "NEW
ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE,"
FOUND THAT BLACK PATIENTS WITH
THE SAME SYMPTOMS AS WHITE ONES
RECEIVE LESS PAIN MEDICATION AND
ARE REFERRED TO SPECIALISTS LESS
OFTEN.
>> MY BIASES CAN CHANGE THE
DECISIONS THAT I MAKE BUT IT
ALSO AFFECTS THE PERSON ACROSS
FROM ME BECAUSE SHE CAN SEE
PLAINLY WHAT I'M NOT.
AND SO AS A RESULT OF THAT SHE
FEELS LIKE I'M NOT RESPONDING TO
HER NEEDS, AND SHE'S NOT
ULTIMATELY GETTING WHAT SHE
NEEDS OUT OF THE CARE THAT I'M
TRYING TO PROVIDE, AND IT LEADS
TO THIS SORT OF VICIOUS CYCLE OF
DISTRUST.
>> Reporter: IN A NATIONAL
SURVEY OF OVER 2,000 WOMEN, 21%
OF BLACK MOTHERS REPORTED POOR
TREATMENT FROM HOSPITAL STAFF
WHICH THEY ATTRIBUTED TO RACE,
ETHNICITY, CULTURAL BACKGROUND
OR LANGUAGE.
JUST 8% OF WHITE MOTHERS
REPORTED SIMILAR POOR TREATMENT.
GRAYSON HAS HEARD ABOUT POOR
TREATMENT OVER AND OVER AGAIN
FROM HER BLACK PATIENTS AND HOW
IT HAS CREATED DISTRUST AND
OTHER BARRIERS TO CARE.
>> ONE PATIENT TALKED ABOUT HOW
HER PAIN WAS NOT MANAGED WELL
WHEN SHE WAS IN LABOR, AND THAT
SHE DIDN'T FEEL THAT THEY
BELIEVED HER WHEN SHE SAID SHE
WAS IN PAIN, OTHERS HAD CHILD
PROTECTIVE SERVICES CALLED ON
THEM IF THEY EXPRESS FEELINGS OF
DEPRESSION.
AND THAT KEEPS PEOPLE FROM
COMING BACK TO CARE.
>> Reporter: THAT BIAS, COUPLED
WITH SHORT PATIENT VISITS, MEANS
OBSTETRICIANS CAN HAVE A HARD
TIME DIGGING INTO ROOT CAUSES OF
A PATIENT'S PROBLEMS, SAYS DR.
PINCKNEY.
>> I DON'T NECESSARILY HAVE THE
TIME TO SIT THERE AND DO THE
EDUCATIONAL COMPONENT OR THE
PREVENTIVE THINGS.
I DON'T HAVE THE TIME TO SIT
THERE AND SAY, "SO HOW ARE YOU
DOING TODAY? TELL ME ABOUT YOUR
KIDS," AND REALLY BUILDING THAT
RELATIONSHIP.
>> I THINK WE HAVE TO HAVE A
MORE THOUGHTFUL WAY OF THINKING
ABOUT THE WAY THAT OUR BIASES
ARE STRUCTURED INTO THE SYSTEM,
FROM THE WAY THAT WE DO INFORMED
CONSENT TO THE WAY THAT WE
INTERACT WITH PATIENTS EVERY
STEP ALONG THE WAY, FROM INTAKE,
FROM TRIAGE TO NURSING, TO THE
CARE TEAM.
>> OH, HE DIDN'T LIKE THAT.
>> NO, HE FIGHTS BACK.
>> Reporter: AND THAT IS WHERE
MIDWIVES GRAYSON AND OWEN COME
IN, WORKING TO COUNTERACT THAT
BIAS AND RE-ESTABLISH TRUST
THROUGH MIDWIFERY CARE.
AS CERTIFIED NURSE-MIDWIVES,
THEY ARE TRAINED IN THE FULL
SPECTRUM OF LOW RISK
GYNECOLOGICAL AND OBSTETRIC
CARE, SHORT OF SURGERY.
IN ADDITION TO PHYSICAL CHECKUPS
AND TESTS, THEY ALSO ADDRESS
THEIR PATIENTS' MENTAL, SOCIAL,
AND EMOTIONAL NEEDS.
>> ALL OF OUR VISITS ARE AN HOUR
LONG.
I WANT TO GET TO KNOW WHO THEY
ARE AS A PERSON AND WHAT'S
IMPORTANT TO THEM AND WHAT THEIR
DAILY LIFE IS LIKE.
SO WE TALK, AND WE TALK ABOUT
FAMILY AND STRESS AND WHAT MAKES
THEM HAPPY.
>> AND THE EMOTIONAL SUPPORT AND
THE PHYSICAL SUPPORT...
>> Reporter: MIDWIFE JODILYN
OWEN SAYS THE GOAL IS TO BUILD
RELATIONSHIPS WITH WOMEN
ALLOWING THEM TO SEE AND DEAL
WITH WARNING SIGNS BEFORE THEY
BECOME URGENT MEDICAL ISSUES.
>> IT IS THROUGH LISTENING THAT
WE START TO UNDERSTAND THE
CHALLENGES SHE'S FACING THAT CAN
CONVERT A NON-PREGNANCY ISSUE
INTO A PREGNANCY EMERGENCY.
SO IF WE ALLOW HYPERTENSION TO
DEVELOP, IT WILL DEVELOP INTO
PREECLAMPSIA.
SO IN OUR MODEL, WE'RE SAYING, I
SEE YOU ARE DEVELOPING THIS, I'M
GOING TO INTERVENE USING THE
LOWEST RESISTANCE MODEL FIRST.
>> Reporter: 75% OF THEIR
PATIENTS ARE ON MEDICAID.
FOR SOME, SIMPLY GETTING TO A
DOCTOR'S APPOINTMENT CAN BE A
CHALLENGE.
>> IF YOU IMAGINE A WOMAN WHO IS
WORKING SHIFT WORK AND HAS NO
CONTROL OVER HER SCHEDULE; SHE
DOESN'T HAVE A CAR SO SHE'S
BOUND BY A BUS SCHEDULE.
SHE'LL WALK IN 15 MINUTES LATE
AND THEY'LL TELL HER SHE CAN'T
BE SEEN THAT DAY.
SHE'S BEEN SITTING ON A BUS FOR
AN HOUR AND A HALF AND IS PRETTY
SURE SHE'LL NEVER DO THAT AGAIN.
>> WHEN YOU ALL TOLD ME YOU HAD
SOMEBODY LAST WEEK...
>> Reporter: AND SO, GRAYSON AND
OWEN GO OUT OF THEIR WAY TO MAKE
SURE THEY ARE AVAILABLE TO THEIR
PATIENTS.
>> WE MEET THEM WHERE THEY ARE,
BOTH LITERALLY AND FIGURATIVELY
WE VISIT MANY OF OUR PATIENTS AT
HOME.
A LOT OF TIMES THAT THEY HAVE AN
APPOINTMENT TO COME TO OUR
OFFICE AND THEY DON'T MAKE IT,
WE'LL CALL THEM AND LIKE OKAY,
ARE YOU OKAY, DO YOU NEED US TO
COME SEE YOU?
>> Reporter: AND THE COMMITMENT
DOESN'T END WHEN THE BABY IS
BORN.
>> THE POSTPARTUM CARE THAT WE
PROVIDE FOR THEM IS REALLY,
REALLY KEY IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
NIGHT THEY KNOW THEY CAN TEXT US
OR CALL US.
>> Reporter: ALEXIUS HILL STILL
REMEMBERS THE MULTIPLE VISITS IN
THE WEEKS AFTER GRAYSON AND OWEN
DELIVERED HER DAUGHTER CHLOE
NINE MONTHS AGO.
>> JODILYN AND NIKIA WOULD COME
AND CHECK ON HOW CHLOE WOULD
LATCH ON, CHECK ON IF I HAD ANY
BLEEDING, ASK ME ABOUT ANY
CONCERNS I MIGHT HAVE.
THEY MADE SURE I ATE RIGHT STILL
EVEN AFTER DELIVERING CHLOE,
MADE SURE I CONSUMED ENOUGH
WATER.
SO EVEN UNTIL THIS POINT NOW IT
STILL FEELS LIKE THEY'RE THERE.
>> Reporter: IN 2014, THE
MEDICAL JOURNAL "THE LANCET"
CONCLUDED THAT INCLUDING
MIDWIFERY CARE IN HEALTH SYSTEMS
REDUCES MATERNAL AND NEWBORN
MORTALITY.
AND A STUDY IN "THE AMERICAN
JOURNAL OF OBSTETRICS AND
GYNECOLOGY" FOUND THAT
PARTICIPATING IN GROUP PRENATAL
CARE CAN REDUCE THE RISK OF PRE-
TERM BIRTH, ESPECIALLY FOR BLACK
WOMEN.
>> WHEN WE LOOK AT WHAT'S
OBVIOUSLY DIFFERENT BETWEEN THE
WAY WE ORGANIZE OUR MATERNAL
HEALTH SYSTEM AND THE REST OF
THE DEVELOPED WORLD, MIDWIVES
ARE ON THE PERIPHERY IN OUR
COUNTRY, AND THEY'RE RIGHT AT
THE CENTER OF CARE EVERYWHERE
ELSE.
REALLY IT SHOULDN'T BE ABOUT
MIDWIVES VERSUS O.B.'S.
THAT'S REALLY NOT WHAT IT'S
ABOUT.
IT'S ABOUT TRYING TO PROVIDE
WOMEN OPTIONS FOR CARE, AND ALSO
IDEALLY ACCESS TO BOTH.
>> Reporter: GRAYSON AND OWEN
AGREE, AND HAVE FORMED
PARTNERSHIPS WITH MEMPHIS
OBSTETRICIANS, INCLUDING DR.
PINCKNEY.
>> WE NEED THE MIDWIVES AND THEY
NEED US IF THEY NEED A SURGEON,
IF THERE'S AN EMERGENCY THEN WE
CAN BE THERE FOR THEM.
>> THE NORM OUGHT TO BE
PROVIDING PEOPLE WITH CARE
THAT'S SAFE AND SUPPORTIVE AND
EMPOWERING.
WE SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO ALL
THREE.
>> Reporter: GRAYSON AND OWEN
ARE PLANNING AN APPRENTICESHIP
PROGRAM AT CHOICES TO TRAIN MORE
MIDWIVES OF COLOR.
>> IT'S A PRIVILEGE FOR ME TO BE
ABLE TO PROVIDE CARE TO BLACK
WOMEN.
WHEN THEY FIND ME THEY ARE
RELIEVED, AND THEY TALK ABOUT
THAT.
I THINK THEY SEE IN ME THEY SEE
THEMSELVES.